.SH Installation And Operation
.br
.LP
The AberMUD5 system is distributed in source form. The normal distribution is
a distribution of source code, documentation and initial game universe. To
install AberMUD you should unpack the distribution archive with tar. 
Having unpacked the system you will have three subdirectories called:-
.SP 1
.IP 'DOC' 25
Documentation
.IP 'SOURCE' 25
System source code
.IP 'UNIVERSE' 25
Supplied game universe
.SP 1
.LP
Go into the SOURCE directory and edit the file 'System.h'. This contains
the configuration parameters that are hard coded into the game
.LP
.B Options
.LP
.IP ANSI_C 25
You can set this if you are using an ANSI compiler.
.IP NO_VOID 25
Your compiler doesn't know what 'void' means.
.IP LOG_FILE 25
This defines the name of the file used by both
the system and database logging functions
.IP SECURE 25
This option restricts some database actions like
writing to arbitary filenames. It's for the really
paranoid.
.IP UNIX 25
Indicate you are compiling for Unix
.IP MAXUSER 25
Maximum number of simultaneous players to allow. This
value is limited by the number of file descriptors
available. On a SUN for example this can be about 250.
.IP MAXNAME 25
The longest length of a name a player is allowed.
.IP MAXUSERID 25
The maximum length of a userid. Note the comments here -
unless you are porting to a system with usernames
longer than 32 letters don't alter this.
.IP PANSY_MODE 25
The game doesn't delete people when they die off. 
Instead it halves their score and sets their strength
quite low. Some people, especially in the US, prefer
this option.
.IP REGISTER 25
Ask and log users email addresses. You can alter 
the database to force registration should you 
desire that degree of security.
.IP TCP_PORT 25
The default port used for connections. The next two
ports after this are also used for client and BSX
links respectively.
.IP USERFILE 25
The file where users are recorded. 
.I IMPORTANT: 
The passwords used by AberMUD are not
crypted. This file should be protected.
.IP BOSS1..BOSS5 25
Set these to the names of characters you wish to
be able to use the system as a game controller. You
should be very careful with this. The first letter
must be capital and the rest lower case.
.SP 1
.LP
Next check the Makefile is OK for your system. You may have to change the
definition of CC in paticular. On SYS5 machines you will probably need to
add networking libraries. The distributed Makefile is correct for Linux.
.LP
Check the ValidLogin.c code. This is a module designed to be user 
customised to suit your own preferences on login control and maximum
user limits. As supplied it permits 20 users between 11pm and 7am,
12 users between 7am and 9pm, 12 from 9pm to 10pm and 16 from 10pm to 11pm.
.LP
When you have got all this right, you can just type 'make' and eventually
you should end up with a set of compiled programs as follows:-
.SP 1
.IP server 25
The game driver. This runs games
.IP Run_Aber 25
A boot strap program. It disconnects from the terminal when
run, and reboots AberMUD whenever it finishes.
.IP FindPW 25
This program can be used to obtain a players password.
.IP Reg 25
Reg <name> registers a person.
.SP 1
.LP
AberMUD5 is normally run using the Run_Aber program. This starts up the
server in the background, and should it crash or reset will restart a new
server to replace it. The standard AberMUD reset mechanism is implemented
in this manner by resetting the server itself every game reset. 
The Run_Aber program runs the server with the arguments it is supplied with.
Thus the arguments to Run_Aber are the same as the arguments to the server
itself.
.LP
The server is a single large program which implements the communications,
interpretation and editing of the game world. It is started with a command
line of the form ' server <databasename> '. It begins by loading the 
supplied universe file into memory then creates its network connections
and commences execution. You can select the range of ports used by the
program by doing 'server -p <portnum> <databasename>'. This is commonly
used when you want a seperate game copy for editing and testing. The
game operates on three ports. The first services normal telnet connections,
as well as links to the standard mud clients. The second port uses a 
special protocol used by AberMUD5, and also now DickMUD, to permit lines
to be uploaded and downloaded for local editting. An example client for
this protocol is available. The third port runs Bram Stolk's BSX protocol,
a crude but workable graphics protocol based on polygon downloads. To use
the BSX facilities you will want the BSXmud client from lysator.liu.se.
You may also want Muddraw should you wish to do graphical game editing.
.LP
The other programs FindPW and Reg are small utilities that allow you
to manage the user file. They provide the ability to query a users 
password, and to mark a user as registered, if the
.I REGISTRATION
option has been defined. This option is still under test and may or may not
work correctly.

