ABERED:- AberMud zone file editor

Installing this is relatively simple task.

Firstly unpack the archive, if you are using an IBM compatable machine
then the binaries should be included already, though you may choose to
rebuild then if you wish.  Two IBM binaries have been included.

** IBM machine

- For those with only a 286 or less

This version was compiled with pcc, a shareware C compiler.  It will run on
an 80286, though it has some limitations.  Namely it is restricted in the 
amount of memory it can have.  The restriction is 64K and thus it can only
handle small zones.  Suggestion is to simply break zones up into small
pieces.  (Note 64K is NOT the file size, file size will be much less)
In addition to this, the binary does NOT support wflags, though you could
recompile it without _NO_WFLAGS 

80386 or better.  This version was compiled with a full 32bit compiler,
gcc or djgpp and thus the binary comes under conditions in the GNU 
General Public License.  Note that this version will more than likely 
crash a 286 or lesser machine.  
Also note that you need to have go32.exe in your path to use this
binary.  A copy of go32.exe is provided in the GNU directory along with
the COPYING information provided with DJGPP

Recompiling the binaries:
In the src directory type make. This will list the options available.
make pcc286 compiles the 286 version with pcc compiler
make unix for the unix version
make gcc386 for the 386+ dos version compiled with djgpp (gcc for ibm)

If you have another compiler, I imagine it shouldn't be to difficult to get
it working.  You may need to define a few things, such as DOS_MACHINE
See UNIX installation for little more detail.

I'd be interested in makefiles for any other compilers, though they should
use command lines to define flags rather than editing the source.

It has been noted that u_char's give some problems.  If your system complains
it does not know what they are, make sure that the typedef for it is commented
out in types.h.  Likewise if it complains it doesn't know what it is.

** UNIX installation

Copy the file Makefile.uni to Makefile and type make
Depending om your exact machine, you may need to define certain things

EQBUG: If your system complains that it does NOT know about functions like
       strncasecmp() then define this.

